8/22/13

The American Colonial Experience

Motivations for immigration:
 Religious persecution

17th Century
 Protestation and English Reformations
  Martin Luther

  1538 Henry 8th displeased with Catherine of Aragon from Spain
  Tension between religious and political leaders.
  English Reformation
   Henry 8th not granted annulment and declares himself head of own church(Anglican Church, Church of England), performs own annulment.
   1558 Queen Elizabeth takes over and reaffirms English reformation.
   Pilgrims and Puritans emerge from English Reformation 
   Pilgrims - Separatists. Want to separate from church of England.
   Puritans - Descenters of Church of England, want to reform it. Want to change things. Believe Church of England should be exlusively Protestants. Grows more rapidly than pilgrims.
  1603 Queen Elizabeth (virgin queen, no children/heir) dies
  James 1st comes in to be King of England.
  King James and his son Charles 1st persecute Puritans, causing them to immigrate to new world.

  By mid 16th century,
  1642-1651 English civil war
   Charles 1 executed. Leads to Puritan Revolution
 Puritan Revolution
  Puritan Republic in England. Led by Oliver Cromwell. Immigration of Puritans for reason of religious persecution slows down.
  English people push for reinstitution of monarchy. James II comes over to England. People don't want a Catholic king. Laws are passed that the monarch will always be Protestant

 King Philip's War
  1675 In New England - Wompanog chief, Metacomet joins forces with Anitmas and Arrogoncet. Attack and destroy 13 British settlements, partially destroy 6. Colonists eventually defeat Native Americans by burning their food supplies. Considerable war debt accrued. Strong hatred of Native Americans developed. 
  King Charles investigates New England colonies and takes control. Creates a governor that is appointed by the king. Dominion of New England.
  2 results - colonists and Native American no longer saught lasting peace. King of England reestablishes rule of New England colonies.
  Dominion of New England created local government. Land grants no longer occur on local level.
  1691 - Land owners now allowed to vote instead of just Church members

 The Glorious Revolution
  1688-1689 Bloodless war. William and Mary come over to replace James II. Die childless
  1701 - Act of Settlement - Claims monarch will be Protestant

 Mercantilism, The Navigation Acts

 Salutary Neglect
  1696 - 1763? In 1763? British are trying to recoup losses from French-Indian War

7 Years War
-GW and the Ohio River Valley
-A Global Conflict
-The strategy
-William Pitt
-Treaty of Paris(1763)
--Spain receives New Orleans, lands west of Mississippi River
--British get all of Canada and land east of Mississippi River
--French lose out
--War is very expensive for Great Britain, cost 82 million pounds

Taxing the colonies
-Greenville
--Sugar Act(1764)
--Stamp Act(1765)
-Colonial Response
--Sam Adams
--The Stamp Act Congress

December 16, 1773
Boston Tea Party
